---
layout: post
title: "Build a staffing plan | Activecell: The small business management platform"
author: Adam Neary
tags: ["activecell method", expense]
---

Your team is everything. Plan accordingly!

A staffing plan consists of just three components:

1. How much do you pay each of your types of employees?
2. How many of each type of employee will you need over time?
3. How much will you spend over time on outside contractors to complement your team?

READMORE

Just like with your plan for cost of goods sold, the number of employees you will need, by type, is often a factor of several drivers (primarily fixed or revenue-driven). You might simply plan to add a CFO next year regardless of revenue, but you might plan to add a salesperson for every $500k in revenue in your plan.

The same goes for your contractors, though your contractors are often grouped into categories that map to specific expense accounts.

It's easy to let this process get out of hand, and over time you could build more and more sophistication into the staffing plan, but the goal is to know how much your team (internal and external) will cost over time.

### Internal employees

#### Your list of employee types

When your historical data is loaded into Activecell, we automatically capture the titles of all your internal employees, and these become the initial set of employee types. But, some businesses have goofy titles (notably, we used to have a "Chief Aesthete") that aren't necessarily good for planning. And some groups of employee titles belong together for planning. 

Without over-complicating the process, you know that you will need to assign forecast costs and volume for each type, so coming up with a clean list of types should be relatively straightforward, whether it's:

* analyst, associate, manager, partner
* junior engineer, engineer, senior engineer, manager, executive
* all employees

You know your business best--this should be a quick step, and once you have your list in place, make sure your current and former employees are assigned to the correct type.

### Your team staffing plan

Now that you have your list and historical staffing volume, you will want to forecast forward how many of each type you plan to employ over the next 3 years.

Just like with your plan for cost of goods sold, the number of employees you will need, by type, is often a factor of one of several drivers:

* per active customer
* as a percentage of revenue
* fixed (amounts that you set regardless of other data)

You might simply plan to add a CFO next year regardless of revenue, but you might plan to add a salesperson for every $500k in revenue in your plan.

The Demand Forecast analysis within the Employee Types section allows you to specify the drivers of each employee type and easily model your team's growth over time.

### Contractors

#### Identifying vendors as contractors

When you review your vendor list, it can be helpful to draw a distinction between "contractors" and "vendors." For our purposes, contractors are people that are not internal employees but who make contributions that could be done by internal employees. Vendors provide goods, and they provide outside services that aren't really a part of your business. Really, it is a subjective thing.

Examples of vendors you may want to tag as contractors include anyone who does R&D for you, or who contributes to building your product if you have a product. Outside sub-contractors whose time you re-bill to your clients are a clear choice here. Your PR guy replaces the need for an internal PR guy. Maybe that's someone you want to plan for as part of the staffing plan.

Examples of vendors you may want to leave as vendors include anyone producing goods, and services like accounting and bookkeeping or legal. At some stage, this shifts and you may want to build them into your staffing plan, but for now they most likely represent indirect general & administrative costs.

You can tag a vendor as a contractor on the Vendor List, and that vendor will be separated out to your Employee List. Don't worry, the vendor will be tagged as a contractor on the Employee List, and you can always untag to send him/her back to the vendor list.

As a brief note, this planning process has nothing to do with the debate as to whether a contractor is **actually** an employee. This is a sensitive topic for tax reasons, and we don't recommend skirting the law on this one bit. Seriously. The important part of this process is identifying contractors who need to be planned for alongside your internal team, even though they remain contractors in every sense.

#### Building contractors into your plan

You can add contractors to your existing employee types, but generally the employee types are modeled based on a single employee and his/her annual salary. When you get into contractors, it can be useful to simply model the total cost, without worrying about hours or quantities. In the employee type settings, you can specify that you just want to model costs directly, and this will skip worrying about quantities and simply model your cost drivers directly.

Done and done.

<!-- # Advanced steps for the pros

After your first pass, there are a couple pro-tips that may aid the advanced users or that folks that have been up and running on activecell for some time and want to take their analysis to the next level...

####  -->