---
layout: post
title: "Plan for cost of goods sold"
author: Adam Neary
tags: ["activecell method", expense]
---

You already have a plan for revenue by revenue stream, so now you need to figure out what direct expenses will be incurred to deliver that revenue, leaving aside customer acquisition and leaving aside your team.

These costs can be incurred for all revenue streams or just for specific revenue streams, and they tend to be "driven" by only a handful of specific quantitative measures known aptly as "cost drivers." You might incur costs per unit sold of a given product. Or you might incur costs per active customer. Some costs are simply fixed and occur over time, while other costs are best estimated as a percentage of revenue.

<!-- more -->

For planning, it's often best to group expenses into simple categories (which most often map to expense accounts in your accounting process). Then, decided for each category just one cost driver (fixed, % of revenue, $ per customer, $ per product, etc.) to use for planning.

## Direct costs...assigned directly

The easiest part of the process is when you have an expense in your transaction history that is assigned to a COGS account (or an account you've assign to COGS in Activecell) that is also assigned to a specific product (or "item" in QuickBooks), which will automatically roll up to a revenue stream.

You may have many of these transactions that, in aggregate, will provide a bulk of your COGS for a given revenue stream. If this is the case, fantastic, because this is the most reliable and accurate way to get to these figures.

If they are captured this way in your accounting data, it will flow through to Activecell automatically.

## Unassigned COGS need cost drivers

For the rest of your COGS, planning necessitates that you identify the cost drivers that build these costs in the first place, expense account by expense account.

This is best explained with specific examples and specific choices. 

In Activecell, the cost drivers for COGS are:

* per unit sold
* per active customer
* as a percentage of revenue
* fixed (amounts that you set regardless of other data)

As an example, hosting/server costs for a software company grow as the active customer count grows, while raw material costs for a manufacturing company grow per unit sold. Generally, the first three drivers are the most common, as it's rare for a COGS expense to be fixed over time (these costs often turn out to be general & administrative), but we provide the facility to do this if necessary.

In addition, you should specify whether the account applies to all revenue streams or just one.

Just like with your customer acquisition budget, once you identify the cost driver, Activecell does the rest, calculating your unit expenses so that you can calibrate your model and plan for the future.

Done and done.

## Unit volume

In the event that you forecast any COGS on a "per unit sold" basis, it would be helpful to know how many units you forecast to sell. This does not apply to many businesses that manage these matters on a percentage of revenue basis. However, if you sell goods that you manufacture, this might be the time to think through many many t-shirts or craft airplanes you plan to sell.

For historical data, this relies entirely on the "quantity" field in your accounting data, and the Unit Volume analysis within the Revenue Streams section compares revenue with unit volume to calculate and forecast unit revenue. Since you already have a revenue forecast in place, the two variables that work together are your unit revenue forecast and your unit volume forecast. Adjusting one impacts the other, and so it is easy to play around with the forecast to see the impact of various changes.

Once you are comfortable with your unit volume forecast, your COGS forecast will take care of itself.

# Advanced steps for the pros

After your first pass, there are a couple pro-tips that may aid the advanced users or that folks that have been up and running on activecell for some time and want to take their analysis to the next level...

## Assign more direct costs directly

Often within a revenue stream, there are lots of different products of varying different natures. In order to improve the accuracy of your forecast, it's always better to capture more of the costs at the product level. By assigning more direct costs right to the product (item) they belong to, your data is instantly more accurate.

## Create one revenue stream per product for finer-grained analysis

For businesses with many different products of very different natures, there is a balance to strike between having just a few revenue streams that are easy to understand and model vs having lots of revenue streams that are more accurate and specific.

In extreme cases, you may want to run the revenue stream analyses per product, and so going as far as creating 1 revenue stream per product may drive that finer-grained analysis you may be seeking. The tradeoff, of course, is that the model becomes more unwieldy at that point, and you lose some of the high-level visibility the tool is intended to provide.

But it's your account, so play around with it to see if it can yield the insights you need most! 