---
layout: post
title: "Plan for customer acquisition across multiple channels"
author: Adam Neary
tags: ["activecell method", revenue]
---

If you determine later that you need 300 active customers to break even, that's all well and good, but from where will those customer come? Hint: your customer acquisition channels. All customers come through one channel or another. Walk-ins for a retailer, or informal word of mouth for a services business are all valid channels. So is direct sales. Paid channels include traditional advertising, paid search, events and conferences, and so on. Modern channels include content marketing (writing articles that will attract customers) and email marketing.

<!-- more -->

The Activecell Method calls for identifying your business's key channels, then defining reach, conversion, and channel/segment mix.

#### Reach 

Reach is the number of potential customers you will reach at the top of your sales funnel. For your business, the top of the funnel might be prospects that convert to leads that convert to customers. Or it might be website visitors who convert to trials who convert to customers. Planning for how many customers will have a touchpoint with your business is critical because it drives the conversation about conversion.

#### Conversion

Conversion is the percentage of potential customers that become customers. If you reach 1,000 customers at an event, then convert 200 of them into active leads, and then close 50 of them into customers, your overall conversion rate is 50/1000, or 5%. Depending on your industry or the event, that might be amazing or awful. You know your business best!

#### Channel/segment mix

Once you plan for the number of customers you will reach (per channel) and how they should convert (per channel), you need to think about the makeup of the customers that will result from that channel. Often times, referrals yield more platinum customers than paid search, for example. We call this channel/segment mix. If you have grouped your historical customers into channels and segments, this is easy to calculate. If you haven't, make a quick and dirty estimate for the model, and then over time you will see how it all shakes out.

### Defining your customer acquisition stages

Before thinking about how your channels will convert, it will help to define the stages through which they will convert. Hint: it's more semantics and labels than anything else. If you have sales automation software like salesforce.com, you've probably already defined the stages of customer acquisition. If you track your web funnel, same story.

For web companies, you generally see something like:

* visitors who convert to 
* trials who convert to 
* customers

In sales-oriented companies you can see something like:

* prospects who convert to 
* leads who convert to 
* customers

Don't over-think it. At worst, if you don't even have a conversion cycle, kill the entire concept and abandon reach and conversion entirely. Just focus on customer volume driven by each channel.

### Defining your channels

Again, the key here is to avoid overcomplicating the process. As a guide, don't start with a philosophical view of your customer acquisition process. Start with what your data will support. If you're a web company and your analytics can distinguish between paid search, organic search, and affiliate/referral traffic, there you go. If it cannot, don't bother distinguishing until it can. If you have a consulting business, you might know anecdotally which customers were word of mouth vs which found you through your advertising efforts. If so, those are two valid channels for you.

For tracking historical reach and conversion, you may have sophisticated instrumentation in place to provide granular views into your sales funnel or your web funnel. You might have a ton of data, or you might have nothing. Ultimately, the goal is to automate the process, but that may be a longer-term journey. Don't let this slow you down.

### Define channels with a spreadsheet

When you completed step 1, building a historical baseline, you may not have broken out your historical revenue by customer. If it is possible to run a report at this stage by customer, that would be useful. In addition, any data you can dump into Excel to support the calculation of conversion will help.

At this stage, you may have 1 row for each of the customers you have had over the last 3 years. Depending on your business, this may be very many or very few. If it is few enough to categorize manually, do it. I prefer to add a column for the mapping and then copy and paste the names of segments next to each. Then I can create a pivot table to aggregate my historical revenue by channel. Perhaps, however, it may be easier to simply cut and paste rows until your customers are naturally grouped by channel, and then you can simply add subtotal rows.

#### Reach and conversion in a spreadsheet

The difficulty on calculating reach and conversion in a spreadsheet relates directly to the quality of the data that you have available, which is almost certainly outside of your accounting data. If you have data you can pull from your CRM or your web analytics system, that will drive this forward, the value of which is exponentially increased when you begin to marry those insights with your objective record of customers from each of those channels performs once acquired.

So get gritty and pound out an answer. How do each of your channels convert? The answer is up to you.

#### Channel/segment mix in a spreadsheet

Since you have now tagged a channel and a segment for each of your customers, there is just some simple arithmetic required to determine the percentage of each channels that go to each segment. This is a fabulous use of a pivot table. Group by channel, analyze by segment. It can be a bit cumbersome to determine month by month, so a single answer is probably good enough for planning.

### Define channels with Activecell

Unlike with revenue streams, which Activecell anticipates for you automatically, channels are entirely yours to create. Initially, all customer map to a single "General" channel. 

In the past, we have helped suggest channels based on your industry, but ultimately nothing replaces giving your unique business some thought and building a model around how you operate. Our generic suggestions seemed to be short-circuiting this process in a bad way and inviting very understandable "that's not how my business works" objections.

So step one is to rename "General" to your most prevalent channel, and to add the remaining channels using the Channel List page. Once you have your channel list in place, simply drag and drop your customers into the appropriate channel. Activecell will manage all historical (and future!) transactions automatically. Once the Channel List looks good, you're all set, and you can view aggregate historical revenue to validate your work right in place.

As a quick note, some businesses don't track customers at all. Retail organizations are a great example, and sometimes they just track aggregate revenue. In these instances, it can be quite difficult to plan for customer volume, since the data doesn't support this type of analysis. The Activecell team is aware of this issue and future feature build out will give businesses with this model more flexibility in planning.

#### Reach and conversion with Activecell

Tragically, there is no easy and consistent answer to reach and conversion given the wide variety of channels and systems used to track those channels. In the future, integrations with CRM systems and web analytics systems will help automate this process. For the time being, it's a relatively manual process. In fact, this is just about the most manual process in the Activecell model.

For your historical reach and conversion, the best approach is to follow the guidelines of the "Reach and conversion in a spreadsheet" section, and then drop those numbers into the model. In the future, we will be working to automating this process without losing the flexibility our customers require.

#### Customer/segment mix with Activecell

While Activecell does not yet automate reach and conversion, it does give you a healthy leg up on customer/segment mix. Since we have all customers mapped to channels and segments, and since we have historical revenue for each customer, this complex calculation is a breeze. Plus, in Activecell, every time you log in, it is refreshed automatically.

### Advanced steps for the pros

After your first pass, there are a couple pro-tips that may aid the advanced users or that folks that have been up and running on activecell for some time and want to take their analysis to the next level...

#### Instrumentation

The biggest challenge with tracking conversion--by far--is data availability. But simply, most businesses don't have the data required to support the analysis they would love to see. The easiest way around this is to "instrument" your channels. Use web analytics tools (Google Analytics is free!) to track web traffic, and you will at least know total unique visitors vs customer count. Make a habit of counting/tracking attendees at events you hold. Ensure that salespeople are recording total prospects reached, not just customers closed.