---
layout: post
title: Step 3: Segment your customer base
author: Adam Neary
---

Business planning is a customer-driven process. "How many t-shirts do I have to sell to break even?" is the wrong question. The right question is, "To how many customers do I have to sell t-shirts to break even?" (The difference isn't semantic.) Plus, if there are different groups of customers with different buying profiles, the question is, "To how many of each group of customers do I have to sell t-shirts to break even?" These groups are commonly referred to as "segments."

Software companies often have free users, paid users, and premium users (or some such hierarchy). Retailers have loyalty/return customers and walk-ins. People who make pickles have wholesalers they sell to and customers who buy at farmers' markets. We all have segments.

By defining segments that make sense for your business and segmenting your historical customers into these segments, it becomes massively easier to plan for how many customers you expect to service in the future. 

## Unit revenue

One of the key insights to determine for your segments is "Unit revenue." How much revenue, for each of your revenue streams, will a single customer yield on average, for each of your customer segments? You can iteratively improve this estimate over time, but the first pass can be pretty quick and dirty.

## Churn rate

The other key insight to determine for your segments is "Churn rate." What percentage of your June customers are still customers in July? For businesses with recurring revenue, no metric is more critical, and it typically can vary widely by segment. Again, a quick and dirty first pass is ok. We'll get more sophisticated later on.

# Defining your segments

In my experience, many business owners often roll their eyes at this stage and just say, "I will just work with 1 segment for now, thank you." Customer segmentation may seem like an unnecessary chore holding up the planning process, but think: When you have to dig into unit economics and define how much revenue a single customer will yield or how likely a single customer is to churn, this is when the business owner says, "Well, that depends!" 

As a simplifying guideline, whatever it depends on most should define your segments. For Activecell, there is a clear distinction between our trial customers, our monthly subscription customers, our annual subscription customers, and customers that come to us through advisory partnerships (e.g. accounting firms who offer Activecell to their entire client case). In this case, our advisory partnership segment tends to have lower unit revenue (we do volume discounts) but also lower churn, since the tools are built into their offering.

# Define customer segments with a spreadsheet

When you completed step 1, building a historical baseline, you may not have broken out your historical revenue by customer. If it is possible to run a report at this stage by customer, that would be useful. Though it would get large, it would be useful to have this report at the monthly as opposed to quarterly grain. This will be useful for calculating churn rate.

At this stage, you may have 1 row for each of the customers you have had over the last 3 years. Depending on your business, this may be very many or very few. If it is few enough to categorize manually, do it. I prefer to add a column for the mapping and then copy and paste the names of segments next to each. Then I can create a pivot table to aggregate my historical revenue by segment. Perhaps, however, it may be easier to simply cut and paste rows until your customers are naturally grouped by segment, and then you can simply add subtotal rows.

## Unit revenue in a spreadsheet

Unit revenue at a high level isn't particularly tough in a spreadsheet. For each period, use COUNTIF functions or the equivalent to count the number of customers with positive revenue in the period. Divide total revenue by that figure to get unit revenue (how much revenue can I expect from a single customer>). 

The problem, of course, is that this doesn't get into a segment's unit revenue by revenue stream, which can be very useful to know. If you're an Excel Hero, you might use pivot tables to get there, but that sort of Excel Kung Fu is well beyond the scope of this article.

## Churn rate in a spreadsheet

Churn rate is much trickier in a spreadsheet. There are TONS of ways to calculate churn, but the simplest and most universal is to take a useful/reasonable period--in our case a month--and to draw a simple distinction. Whenever the customer's last month is, that's the month in which a customer churns.

To achieve this quickly and easily, create a mirrored table below your customer revenue table. The calculation in the cell below is 1 if the customer has revenue in the previous month and not in future months, 0 otherwise. You should be able to sum that column to get the total churned customer count, and then divide that by total customer count for the previous period. Not very elegant, and certainly slow to repeat, but it works.

# Define customer segments with Activecell

Unlike with revenue streams, which Activecell anticipates for you automatically, segments are entirely yours to create. Initially, all customer map to a single "General" customer segment. 

In the past, we have helped suggest segments based on your industry, but ultimately nothing replaces giving your unique business some thought and building a model around how you operate. Our generic suggestions seemed to be short-circuiting this process in a bad way and inviting very understandable "that's not how my business works" objections.

So step one is to rename "General" to your most prevalent segment, and to add the remaining segments using the Segment List page. Once you have your segment list in place, simply drag and drop your customers into the appropriate segment. Activecell will manage all historical (and future!) transactions automatically. Once the Segment List looks good, you're all set, and you can view aggregate historical revenue to validate your work right in place.

As a quick note, some businesses don't track customers at all. Retail organizations are a great example, and sometimes they just track aggregate revenue. In these instances, it can be quite difficult to plan for customer volume, since the data doesn't support this type of analysis. The Activecell team is aware of this issue and future feature build out will give businesses with this model more flexibility in planning.

## Unit revenue and churn with Activecell

Go ahead. Read about all the manual Excel voodoo requirement to calculate historical unit revenue and churn in a spreadsheet.

In Activecell, it's calculated for you dynamically, and every time you log in, it is refreshed automatically. Why don't you stretch your legs. You're covered.

# Advanced steps for the pros

After your first pass, there are a couple pro-tips that may aid the advanced users or that folks that have been up and running on activecell for some time and want to take their analysis to the next level...

## Ensure specific customer and account coverage

I mentioned above that Activecell calculates unit revenue and churn rate automatically. Naturally, the value of this functionality pivots on the percentage of revenue that is attributed to both a customer and a specific. The constraints of most accounting systems demand that revenue be attributed to an account and a customer, but if you don't attribute revenue to a specific customer, or if you book revenue to a "General" sort of revenue account, the accuracy and value of those metrics decline.

## Amortize cash basis revenue (cash paid up front or after a long project)

The big killer for automated churn calculation is cash basis revenue accounting. Either your customer pays up front in month 1 for a year's worth of service, or you do a 10-month project and get paid at the end. In a cash-basis accounting world, you are not seeing revenue in the middle months of either of those two scenarios.

As we love to joke, now and in other situations, "cash basis accounting is for quitters." There are advantages to cash basis accounting (mostly ease and simplicity), but accrual accounting reflects what's actually going on in a business, and this is a necessary pre-requisite for planning.

In this particular instance, rather than recognizing revenue when the cash comes in (either earlier or later), divide the revenue over the span of the contract. If you have an annual plan for $1,200, that's $100 per month for the month for that customer.

Without this, churn rate will be all over the map.