---
layout: post
title: "Group products & services into revenue streams | Activecell: The small business management platform"
author: Adam Neary
tags: ["activecell method", revenue]
---

Revenue streams are general categories for revenue. They tend to be strategic, whereas sometimes revenue accounts built based on the tax code or some other non-strategic reporting requirement. This is why revenue streams are so useful for planning, and why revenue accounts are often enough not. Planning isn't what they were designed for!

<!-- more -->

### Three scenarios for how your revenue accounts

It may be the case that your historical baseline for revenue is broken down into 4-5 revenue accounts that cleanly represent your lines of business. If so, great! Those are probably your key revenue streams.

If, however, you have 40+ revenue accounts because your accounting system provides for all sorts of granular reporting, you might want to group those accounts into manageable "revenue streams" for planning. In short, a revenue stream is a "type" of revenue. Perhaps you sell software but also do consulting. Those are definitely two revenue streams. Perhaps you sell products you manufacture but also sell warrantees. Those are separate streams that can and should be modeled separately. 

What if you have the opposite issue: just 1 line of detail for all of revenue. Well, if that is because you just do one thing, that's entirely fine! Just call that "General" or "Revenue" and leave well enough alone. If, however, you do lots of different things and just don't have the detail in the historical data, maybe there's an easy way to go back and split out those revenue records into different accounts. Or maybe you just want to create the accounts and capture that detail going forward. No problem.

Your business will fall into one of these three scenarios: (1) revenue accounts are granular, (2) revenue accounts are not granular enough, and (3) the goldilocks scenario (revenue accounts are just right!). Once you know where your business stands, let's discuss how to group your accounts in a spreadsheet or in Activecell.

### Define revenue streams with a spreadsheet

If your accounts map cleanly to revenue streams 1-to-1 then you can skip to step 3. You're done.

If your accounts are not granular enough, you can either go back into your accounting software to update your account list and remap historical revenue transactions or your can simply make top-down estimates off the cuff. In my opinion, the latter is a quicker and easier way to get started straight away, and then you can always go in after your plan is put together to update your historical data. You never know what you're going to need until the plan is in place.

If your accounts are too granular, this is easy enough. I prefer to add a column for the mapping and then copy and paste the names of revenue streams next to each. Then I can create a pivot table to aggregate my historical revenue by revenue stream. Perhaps, however, it may be easier to simply cut and paste rows until your accounts are naturally grouped by revenue stream, and then you can simply add subtotal rows.

### Define revenue streams with Activecell

When your revenue accounts are first imported into Activecell, a new revenue stream is created for each one. We believe this will be helpful more often than it will be a nuisance.

If your accounts map cleanly to revenue streams 1-to-1, then this will have been particularly helpful. You can skip to step 3 because you're done.

If your accounts are not granular enough, it's easy enough to create revenue streams in the Revenue Stream List page within the Products section. You can always go back to your historical data at a point in the future to retrofit your old data to your new business model, but for now getting a clean list in the system is better than sticking with "General" unless you really just have such a uniform business offering.

If your accounts are too granular, this is where Activecell really shines. Just add to rename revenue streams until you have a clean list that you like (5-6 streams or less are usually appropriate for modeling), simply drag and drop accounts into their respective revenue streams, and Activecell will manage all historical (and future!) transactions automatically. Once the Revenue Stream List looks good, you're all set, and you can view aggregate historical revenue to validate your work right in place.

Whatever the case, the Revenue Stream List page is designed to allow you to quickly and easily add, delete, and rename revenue streams, and quickly and easily remap accounts from one stream to another.

### Advanced steps for the pros

After your first pass, there are a couple pro-tips that may aid the advanced users or that folks that have been up and running on activecell for some time and want to take their analysis to the next level...

#### Model "scenario" revenue streams

Thinking about entering a new market? Thinking about mixing up your service offering? You don't need to touch your accounting software to run scenarios on a new revenue stream. Just add a new record without any historical accounts in it and begin modeling revenue and costs (to be explained in subsequent sections). 

In minutes you can start to get a picture of breakeven for the new stream, and you can see the impact the added revenue will have on your sales team, your direct costs, and your marketing agenda.

#### Break down "catch-all" revenue accounts

Often enough, businesses will have their lines of business split out with one revenue account per line, but then they will be catch-all revenue accounts that cut across all of them. Refunds and discounts are classic examples of this. What value, indeed, is analysis that shows 5 revenue streams as massively profitable with 1-2 revenue streams entirely in the red because in reality they represent adjustments to the business lines' revenue?

To avoid this, it can be useful to disaggregate these accounts, creating 1 refund account and 1 discount account per revenue stream, in this example. Then, you still have the visibility into refunds and discounts, but you can map each accordingly to avoid polluting your revenue visibility.
 
#### Separate optional revenue from "Other Revenue"

Periodically there isn't a clean distinctive in the chart of accounts between accounts that should appear as Revenue and accounts that should appear as Other Revenue. Other Revenue is traditionally split out to capture interest or if you are renting out unused space in a warehouse. This non-operating revenue is interesting but doesn't belong in your strategic plan.

Similarly, sometimes there is very real operating revenue hidden down in "Other Revenue" and it should be brought up. Your accountant can always help advise on account categorization if there is any question. 